Guru Yoga
by the Fourth Dodrupchen, Tupten Trinlé Pal Zangpo

emaho
Emaho!
rangnang nöchü dakpa pal gyi rir
My entire perception of the world and beings is purified and transforms into the pure realm
of the Glorious Copper-Coloured Mountain.
rangnyi naljor ting ngön dri tö dzin
I am the yoginī, blue in colour, and holding knife and skull-cup.
chiwor pema nyida sum tsek teng
Above my head, upon lotus, sun and moon disk seats placed one above the other
kyab kündü ngö drinchen lama jé
Is the actual embodiment of all sources of refuge, my gracious guru.
mar sal dangden ziji palbar shying
He has a reddish glow and blazes with majesty and splendour.
chen zung dum khyil chak yé dorjé dang
His two eyes are perfectly shaped, his right hand holds a vajra,
yönpé nyamshyak tö bum khatamka
And his left is in the gesture of equanimity, holding a skull-cup, a vase and a khaṭvāṅga
chen dzé dom sum ché kün ku la nab
In the crook of his arm; he is handsome and wears all the garments related to the three types
of vows.
nampa tsokyé dorjér shyukpa la
He appears in the form of the Lake-Born Vajra1
takor pendrub rigdzin pakmépa
And is surrounded by countless paṇḍitas, siddhas and vidyādharas.
til gi gongbur shyukpa lammer sal
They appear vividly, like a vast outpouring of sesame seeds.
sé ché gyal kün sang sum gi
To the gracious guru in whom the blessings of the three secrets
jin dü drinchen lama la
Of all the buddhas and their heirs are gathered together,
miché nying né soldeb na
I pray, ardently and from the depths of my heart—
dak gyü jinlab ngödrub tsol
Bless my mind! Grant me the attainments!
Don’t just utter these words, but pray intensely from the depths of your heart, repeating the
prayer several times.
tar ni lamé né sum lé
Finally, from the guru’s three centres
kar mar ting gé ö rim jung
Rays of white, red and blue light shine out in sequence.
rang gi né sum timpa yi
They dissolve into my own three centres,
drib dak wang dang ngödrub tob
Purifying obscurations and granting empowerments and attainments.
dé tar lama ö du shyu
At the end, the guru melts into light
rang tim tuk yi chik du dré
And dissolves into me; my mind and his wisdom merge as one.
mimik trödral dömé ngang
Within the state of primordial simplicity, free of concepts,
khordé chö kün lhün dzok ah
All phenomena of saṃsāra and nirvāṇa are spontaneously perfect—aḥ!

This was written spontaneously by the one named Tup[ten], the Fourth Dodrup. Virtue!

| Translated by Han Kop, 2022.

Version: 1.0-20220202
↑ Tib. Tsokye Dorje (mtsho skyes rdo rje).