Prayer for Swift Rebirth of the Fourth Dodrupchen Rinpoche, Tupten Trinlé Palzangpo
by the Fifth Dodrupchen Rinpoche, Tupten Long-yang

kyema ho
Kyemaho!
ku sum chik dzok gyalwa drowé gön
Single, perfect embodiment of the three kāyas, victorious protector of beings,
ngagyur tenpé nyima dodrub jé
Sun of the teachings of the Ancient Translations, lord Dodrupchen,
tubten nyinjé trinlé palzangpo
Tupten Trinlé Palzangpo—'Glorious and Excellent Activity for the Sage’s sun-like Teachings'
tukjé jukpa ma lhö ying né gong
Do not relax your compassion, but consider us from the absolute sphere.

tenpa nyinshyin güpé dü ta dir
You who are like the sun of the teachings in this final, degenerate age,
tenpé depön khyé nyi chi chir shek
You who are a captain at the teachings’ helm—why have you departed?
gyundré langdor chöchö mishepé
Now, ignorant of causality and of proper conduct, what to do and to avoid,
gönmé nyikdü drowa su la ré
To whom can we, the protectorless beings of this degenerate age, now turn?

tsa sum damchen sungmé lhatsok kyi
Through the unfailing power of truth and the blessings
jinlab den tu luwa mepa yi
Of the Three Roots and hosts of guardian deities,
tsungmé tubten trinlé palzangpö
May the emanation of the incomparable Tupten Trinlé Palzangpo
yangtrul drowé pungnyen nyur jön tsol
Swiftly return as a friend and protector to all beings.

do ngak chökyi khorlor wang gyurwé
May he swiftly return as a sun of the Heart-Essence teachings,
nyingtik tenpé nyima nyur jön tsol
A mighty sovereign of the Dharma Wheel of sūtra and mantra.
rim nyi naljor lam gyi tsaldzokpé
May he swiftly return as a great wielder of the magic
gyutrul ngawa chenpo nyur jön tsol
Of the perfect strength of the path of two-phase yoga.

kyewa küntu palden lama yi
Throughout all my lives may I never be separated
dorjé sum gyi shi dang mindral war
From the nature of this glorious guru’s three vajras.
kün kyang rigdzin nam shyi sa drö dé
May we all traverse the stages of the four vidyādhara levels
tsé chik zungjuk ku chok drubpar shok
And attain the supreme kāya of union within a single lifetime!

In accordance with requests from lamas, tulkus, monks and disciples in Gangtok, Sikkim—as expressed
by several lamas and monks in particular—I, Longyang, who merely holds the name of
the Fifth Dodrup, made this aspiration. May the Three Roots and hosts of guardians of the
teachings grant the favourable conditions for it to be accomplished just so!

Written on the 27th day of the eleventh month of the Iron Ox year (29 January 2022).

| Translated by Adam Pearcey, 2022

Version: 1.0-20220202