The Lotus Garland
A Short Feast-Offering for the Female Practice of the Heart Essence of the Vast Expanse
by the Fourth Dodrupchen Tubten Trinle Pal Zangpo

Homage to the Mother Ḍākinī of all-encompassing space!
The illusory net’s primordial wisdom of great blissAnd the empty form endowed with all supreme
qualities—Female messenger who bestows supreme wisdom,To you, with a mind of confident
inspiration, I pay homage!
Here, if you wish to swiftly gather the two accumulations, go to a pleasant and harmonious place
and gather offering tormas and so forth.
Refuge and Bodhicitta
namo, gyalyum dorjé pakmo la
Namo! Mother of all the buddhas, Vajravārāhī,
dudral mepar kyab su chi
In you, I take refuge, beyond union and separation.
chokri dralwé semchen nam
I will lead all beings, impartially,
dechen sa la göpar gyi
To the state of great bliss.
Say this three times.
Giving the Command
hrih, trulpé kyilkhor chenpo la
Hrīḥ. In the great, emanated maṇḍala
gek shyejawa mimik kyang
Even the names of obstacles cannot be found.
lobur namtok zungdzin gek
Yet adventitiously, dualistic thoughts and obstacles do arise—
diru ma duk sosor deng
Do not stay here, but be gone!
Recite the mantra of the four hūṃs and cast enchanted substances.
om sumbha(ni) sumbhani hung | grihana grihana hung | grihanapaya grihanapaya hung | anaya ho
| bhagawan bidyaraza krodha hung pé
oṃ sumbha(ni) sumbhani hūṃ | gṛhṇa gṛhṇa hūṃ | gṛhṇāpaya gṛhṇapāya hūṃ | ānaya ho bhagavān vidyārāja
hūṃ phaṭ
Protection Circle
hrih, rangshyin yongdrub ngang nyi lé
Hrīḥ. From the state of the completely perfect nature
tsönché gur chen mepung bar
Arises a great tent made of weapons, blazing with a mass of flames.
ö kyi rawé küntu khyab
A fence of light pervades everywhere,
ma dak tsenmé lak mi nyé
Which no impurities can penetrate.
benza raksha
vajra-rakṣa
Blessing the Offering Substances
om ah hung, chi nang sangwa lamé kyi
Oṃ āḥ hūṃ. Unsurpassable outer, inner and secret offerings appear,
kunzang chötrin rabjam ché
Like the infinite offering clouds of Samantabhadra.
ngowo dzé la yeshe kyi
Substantial in essence, yet transforming
lhatsok nyepé chi du gyur
Into enjoyments that please the wisdom deities.
om benza argham padam pupé dhupé aloké gendhé nevidé shabta sarva pentsa rakta balingta maha
pudza ah hung
oṃ vajra-arghaṃ pādyaṃ puṣpe dhūpe āloke gandhe naivedye śabda sarva-pañca rakta baliṅta mahā-pūjā
āḥ hūṃ
Meditating on Clear Realization.1
ah, nangwa tamché yum ngé long
Āḥ. All that appears is the expanse of the five mothers.
sipa tamché khandrö dal
All that exists is the circle of the ḍākinīs.
gyukyen lé dé shyalyé khang
The celestial palace is beyond cause and condition:
tiklé nyakchik chöying go
The single entrance symbolises the single sphere2 of all-pervading space.
dechen barwé podrang ü
In the centre of the palace blazing with great bliss,
chukyé gesar shyepé teng
Upon the heart of a blossoming lotus
nyimé den la khandrö tso
And a sun-disc seat, stands the foremost of the ḍākinīs:
chökü long na kunzangmo
In the expanse of dharmakāya she is Samantabhadrī,
longkü shying na warahi
In the sambhogakāya realm she is Vajravārāhī,
tulku yeshe tsogyalma
And in nirmāṇakāya form she is Yeshe Tsogyal.
shyal chik chak nyi kudok mar
She has one face and two hands; her body is red in colour.
chermo nyampé dortab chen
She is naked, standing in the posture of equanimity, yet ready to act.
shintu chak dang shyepé shyal
Passionate and smiling,
chak yé töpé chang te’u
In her right hand she holds a small skull-drum3
nyen gyi tekar tö ching trol
That is raised and played close to her ear.
yönpa driguk yuwa ni
In her left hand she holds a hooked knife, the handle
ku la ten né chok du gying
Resting on her hip; her bearing is imposing and graceful.
bhaga gyé shing numa bur
Her bhaga is expanded and her breasts swell.
rinpoché dang shyönnü gyen
She is adorned with jewels and youth-ornaments;
pundariké doshal chang
And wears a garland of white lotus flowers.4
rüpé gyen druk ku la dzé
The six bone ornaments adorn her body,5
nak num utré lentsar chen
Her black, glistening hair is plaited,
rinpoché yi tsé dren ji
And her jewelled diadem shines majestically.
umé chen ni ying la zik
Her central eye gazes into all-encompassing space.
longkü chen gyi drowa dul
Her sambhogakāya eye tames beings.
tulkü chen gyi kham sum guk
Her nirmāṇakāya eye summons the three realms.
ku la gyüdé kyilkhor dzok
In her body the maṇḍalas of all the classes of tantra are perfectly complete.
bumtrak yangpé khandrö kor
She is surrounded by a vast assembly of hundreds of thousands of ḍākinīs.
rikdak pema tötreng tsal
The lord of the families is Mighty Lotus with Skull-Garland.6
atsarya shyön karsal dzum
The youthful ācārya has a light complexion and is smiling.
hérukapa chang dril trol
He appears in the form of a heruka and plays a small skull-drum and bell.
damtsik yeshe nyi sumé
The samaya and wisdom deities are indivisible.
gompa tsam gyi ngödrub tob
Merely by meditating on them I gain accomplishment.
Arouse pride that the samaya and wisdom being are indivisible.
The Visualization for Recitation
rangnyi khandrö tukka ru
I am the ḍākinī. In my heart
pakmo ting nak dri töchen
Is Vārāhī, dark blue in colour and holding a hooked knife and skull-cup.
nying ü ga khyil bam tsen tar
In her heart is a coil of joy, in the centre of which is the syllable vaṃ,
ngak treng khorwé özer gyi
Encircled by the mantra garland. It revolves, emitting light rays that
lha kü nang shyen salwar jé
Illuminate and enhance the appearance of the deities
rikdak lamé tuk gyü kul
It invokes the wisdom mind of the guru, the lord of the families,
dé lé ö trödön nyi jé
Who sends out light rays that accomplish the two benefits.
lamé ku lé dütsi gyün
From the guru’s body, a stream of ambrosia,
zakmé dewa chenpor bab
Undefiled great bliss, flows down.
gawa shyi yi jelé kyi
Through the power of the four blisses
wang shyi yeshe nyam su nyong
The primordial wisdom of the four empowerments is experienced.
With this, one ‘nests the three beings’7. The twelve syllables of the vajra root mantra are
as follows.
om padmo yogini jnana varahi hung
oṃ padmo-yoginī-jñāna-vārāhī hūṃ
Recite the mantra as much as you can and visualize the radiating and absorbing of light rays.
At the end, imagine in the heart of the principal deity of the body maṇḍala8 a locket of
the sun and moon, inside of which you visualize an a syllable surrounded by the mantra garland.
om guhya jnana bodhi tsitta maha sukha rulu rulu hung jo hung
oṃ guhya-jñāna bodhicitta-mahāsukha rulu rulu hūṃ bhyo hūṃ
Then recite the all-embodying mantra of the peaceful and wrathful deities. When you emerge from
the session, repair duplications and omissions, stabilize the blessings, and so forth.
Feast Offering
Blessing the Articles
ho, dewa chenpö nö chok tu
Hoḥ. In the wondrous vessel vessel of great bliss
tsok kyi khorlö longchö ni
Are arranged the delights of the feast-offering,
langdor mepé damtsik dzé
The samaya substances that are free from accepting and rejecting.
om ah hung gi dütsir gyur
With oṃ āḥ hūṃ they are transformed into ambrosia.
Arrange the first portion of the feast offering in three parts.
hung, womin né dang khachö shying
Hūṃ. The Unsurpassed9 and the other celestial realms,
pawo khandro duwé né
The sacred places where the heroic ones10 and ḍākinīs gather,
nyishu tsashyi trulpé yul
The twenty-four emanated places,
nang tar dorjé pungpö drong
Are inwardly the cities of our vajra body.
chiwor dzalandhara sok
The crown of the head is Jālandhara and so on—
den sum tsangwé kyilkhor na
Dwelling in the maṇḍala of the three seats of completeness,11
shyukpé pawo naljorma
Heroic ones and yoginīs,
khandro dang ni khadroma
Ḍākas and ḍākinīs—
tsok kyi duwar shek su sol
Come and enjoy this feast-offering!
utra tortsuk dem sé dem
Your top-knots swaying,
changlö zarbu talala
Your long tresses swinging to and fro,
nyen cha dubu kyilili
Your earrings, anklets and armlets jingling,
rügyen yerkha trololo
Your bone ornaments rattling, your tiny bells ringing,
chang té'u drilbü dra dang ché
With small skull-drums and bells resounding,
dorjé lu dang gar la rol
Take pleasure in our vajra songs and dances!
döyön longchö tsok su bul
We offer you the enjoyment of these sensory delights as the feast!
damtsik nyampa tol lo shak
We confess our impairments of samaya!
chinang bar chö ying su drol
Liberate outer and inner obstacles into all-encompassing space!
chok dang tünmong ngödrub tsol
Grant us the supreme and common accomplishments!
Recite the hundred-syllable mantra.
hung, nangsi namdak ngang lé rangsharwa
Hūṃ. From the purity of appearance and existence
yishyin gyé gur charwa kangwé dzé
Delightful fulfilment substances, fulfilling every wish, arise naturally.
chi nang sangwé chöyön ma tsangmé
Outer, inner and secret offerings in abundance, nothing missing,
kunzang dewa chenpö chötrin di
Like Samantabhadra’s offering clouds of great bliss.
yeshe khandrö lhatsok tukdam kang
May this fulfil the wishes of the hosts of wisdom ḍākinīs,
khor tsok trulpar chepé tukdam kang
And may the wishes of the retinue and other manifestations be fulfilled.
tukdam gyé kang nyamchak galtrul shak
Having fulfilled their wishes, we confess impairments, breakages, transgressions and confusions.
chok dang tünmong ngödrub tsal du sol
Grant us the supreme and common accomplishments!
Enjoying the Accomplishment Substances
dak lü dorjé sum gyi rangshyin gyi
My body has the nature of the three vajras.
kyilkhor lhatsok gyalwa gyatsö tsok
Deities of the maṇḍalas within it, ocean of victorious ones,
dechen dütsi tsok kyi khorlo yi
Through the wheel of the feast’s ambrosia of great bliss,
demchok nyampa nyi du gyé gyur chik
May you be pleased and enjoy this as supreme bliss and equality!
maha sukha a la la ho
mahā-sukha a la la hoḥ
Recite this and contemplate on it, and enjoy the feast.
Dedicating the Remainder
Bless the offerings with:
om akaro mukham sarva dharmanam adyanutpannatota om ah hung pé soha
oṃ ākāro mukhaṃ sarvadharmānām ādyanutpannatvāt oṃ āḥ hūṃ phaṭ svāhā
pem, lhak la wangwé kanyen ni
Peṃ. All you attendants who share in the remainder and carry out the commands:
khandro sumchu tsa nyi dang
The thirty-two ḍākinīs,
ging chen khyo shuk langka bum
The great kiṃkara with consorts and laṅkā spirits in your hundreds of thousands,
ponya sumgya drukchü dé
The three hundred sixty classes of messengers,
gyokma shyi dang barma gyé
The Four Swift Ones and Eight Blazing Ones,
mamo dün dang singmo shyi
Seven Mātṛkās and Four Sisters,
shukdro né nyul tramen nam
The forceful, roaming and therianthropic spirits—12
lhak la dung shying tsokkhang drim
You who crave leftovers and roam the assembly halls,
pampab zangpo di shyé la
Please accept this excellent remainder!
mitün kyen ngen barché sol
Dispel all unfavourable, negative circumstances and obstacles!
cholwé trinlé drubpar dzö
Accomplish the activities entrusted to you, this is our request!
Confession
hung, yeshe khandrö kyilkhor du
Hūṃ. In the maṇḍala of the wisdom ḍākinī,
chödzé matsang drubpa yel
If our offerings were not complete, or our practice was inattentive,
tingdzin jing muk tib la sok
Our meditation drowsy, dull and lifeless,
gal trul nongpa zöpar sol
Forgive all such confusion and mistakes, I pray!
Recite the hundred-syllable mantra.
om benza sato samaya | manupalaya | benza sato tenopa tishta dridho mé bhava | sutokhayo mé
bhava | supokhayo mé bhava | anurakto mé bhava | sarva siddhi mé prayaccha | sarva karma su
tsa mé | tsittam shreyang | kuru hung | ha ha ha ha ho | bhagavan | sarva tatagata benza
ma mé muntsa benzi bhava maha samaya sato ah
oṃ vajrasatvasamayam anupālaya vajrasatva tvenopatiṣṭha ḍṛḍho me bhava sutoṣyo me bhava supoṣyo
me bhava anurakto me bhava sarvasiddhiṃ me prayaccha sarvakarmasu ca me cittaṃ śreyaḥ
kuru hūṃ ha ha ha ha hoḥ bhagavan sarvatathāgatavajra mā me muñca vajrī bhava mahāsamayasattva
āḥ
Completion Phase
ho, chu lé chubur dolwa shyin
Hoḥ. Like bubbles appearing on water,
rang lé trulpé kyilkhor lha
The deities of the maṇḍala, created by myself,
yeshe ying su benza mu
Dissolve into the all-pervading space of primordial wisdom—vajra muḥ!
jetob gyumé lha kur dang
In the post-meditation, everything arises as the illusory body of the deity.
Dedication of Merit
ho, khandroma yi kyilkhor du
Hoḥ. In the maṇḍala of the wisdom ḍākinī,
kyedzok dejö gyipa yi
By practising the generation and completion phases and recitations,
gewé tsawa gang lakpa
Whatever sources of merit I have
dro kün sangye tob chir ngo
I dedicate to the enlightenment of all beings!
Aspiration
ho, nangsi tamché dakpa khachö shying
Hoḥ. All that appears and exists is the celestial realm and
dechen gyurmé dorjé naljorma
Vajrayoginī, unchanging great bliss.
namkün chokden dön gyi pakmo dang
Vajravārāhī, truly blessed with the most sublime of qualities,
rang shyal jal té ngönpar changchub shok
May we see your true face and attain enlightenment!
ho, rikdzin gyüpé jinlab dang
Hoḥ. Through the blessing of the lineage of the vidyādharas,
könchok sum gyi denpa dang
And through the truth of the Buddha, Dharma and Saṅgha,
sangngak zabmö tendrel gyi
And through the auspicious interdependence of the profound Secret Mantrayāna:
jikgyé shyiwé tashi shok
May all be auspicious to pacify the eight fears!
tsesö gyepé tashi shok
May all be auspicious for developing life and merit!
nangwa wang dü tashi shok
May all be auspicious to bring perception under our control!
lokdren tsar chö tashi shok
May all be auspicious to annihilate negative, misleading forces!
nang shyen lha kü chakgyar dzok
With all attachment to perception transformed and perfected as the form of the deity,
drar drak dechen ngak su dak
All sound purified into the great bliss of mantra,
dren tok ösal chökur min
All thoughts matured into the luminosity of dharmakāya—
ja lü zangtal tashi shok
May all be auspicious, so that we attain the translucent rainbow body!

Khenpo Dazer13 said there was a need for a brief practice of the feast offering for the Female
Practice for regular recitation, and urged me to compose one. So it was that, I, Kunzang
Jigme Chöying Rangdrol, who bears the name of the fourth incarnation of Dodrupchen and who
has stable faith in the omniscient Father and Son,14 wrote this. Sarva maṅgalaṃ!

| Translated by Han Kop and edited by Barry Cohen, 2020.
↑ Clear realization (Tib. mngon rtogs, Skt. abhisamaya) is notoriously difficult to translate,
perhaps in particular in vajrayāna context. Here, as Tulku Dawa comments, it refers to
the visualization of the form of the deity, the implements, and so forth.↑ Tib. tiklé nyakchik;
thig le nyag gcig.↑ Tib. chang té'u↑ Skt. puṇḍarīka↑ The Illuminating the Meaning of
Tantra: A Commentary on the Sādhana of Yumka, the Queen of Great Bliss, by Ratön Ngawang
Tendzin Dorje (in short called the Raṭik commentary), says these are: 1) a bone ring for the
crown, 2) earrings, 3) a necklace, 4) anklets and bracelets for the ankles, wrists and
upper arms, 5) a girdle and 6) a sacred Brahmanic thread.↑ Tib. Pema Tötreng Tsal, in other
words, Padmasambhava↑ The three nested beings are the commitment being (Skt. samayasattva),
the wisdom being (Skt. jñānasattva) and the meditation being (Skt. samādhisattva).↑ That
is, the wisdom deity.↑ Skt. Akaniṣṭha↑ Skt vīra; Tib. pawo (dpa’ bo)↑ The three seats are
1) the aggregates (skandha) and elements (dhātu), 2) the sense fields (āyatana), and 3)
limbs (aṅga). In 1) reside the tathāgatas, in 2) reside the male and female bodhisattvas,
and in 3) reside the male and female wrathful deities.↑ Spirits with a human body and an
animal head, Tib. Tramen (phra men).↑ Khenpo Dazer aka Khenpo Dawé Özer (1922–1990) was from
Rahor, a branch of Dzogchen monastery founded by the Third Dzogchen Rinpoche in Gyalrong
near Dergé. He was a student of Pöpa Tulku. He escaped from Tibet together with his former
classmate Rahor Khenpo Tupten and went together with him to Sikkim via Bhutan.↑ i.e., Longchen
Rabjam and Jigme Lingpa.